Before working in the lab,
consult the SDS for specific hazards
relating to the chemicals you are using.
Ensure you are wearing
appropriate attire and PPE
to minimize eye and skin exposure.
Also make yourself familiar with
the location of all necessary emergency
equipment and your lab’s procedure
for cleaning up chemical spills.
See the module “Safety Controls and PPE”
for a review of this information.
Before weighing out a liquid,
you will retrieve some of this liquid
from the stock container.
Always pour your reagent into a
secondary container before use to
protect the liquid in the stock bottle
from becoming contaminated
and to make it easier to transfer
your liquid to your weighing vessel.
To choose an appropriate secondary
container, consider the reagent
you are using and verify container
compatibility by looking at the SDS.
If you are working with
a hazardous chemical, it is best to use
a container that can be capped
to avoid any splashing or evaporation
and to minimize your exposure.
Since we are using DI water, we will
use a beaker for this demonstration.
Double-check the chemical name and
hazards listed on the stock container
before you pour any out into
your secondary container.
Label your secondary container
before you add any reagent to it.
Gently pour the liquid into
the secondary container, taking care
to keep the reagent as far from
your face as possible.
Pour out only a small amount more
than you think you will need
to reduce waste.
Inspect the balance and familiarize
yourself with the balance display
before you measure anything.
The maximum weight that the balance
can weigh is here.
The number of spaces after the decimal
point the balance can read is here.
To confirm that the balance is level,
look at this bubble here.
The bubble should be in the center.
If it is not level,
notify someone in your lab responsible
for leveling the balances.
If you are allowed to level
the balance yourself, adjust the feet
of the balance to level it
before you do anything else.
Once level, press 0
in order to zero the balance.
The tare button, found here,
will be used in our next step.
Now that you have your sample
and you have inspected the balance,
collect all items necessary for the
procedure, including a collection
container for liquid waste.
Label your waste container.
Set up everything next to the balance
you will use and make sure it is all
in easy reach. This includes
your lab wipes, transfer pipettes,
and your weighing vessel.
Open the door of the balance,
Place the weighing vessel
in the center of the balance plate,
Close the doors.
Wait for the reading to stabilize,
and tare the balance.
If you are sharing the balance
with multiple people, it may be wiser
to write down the weight of your vessel
instead of using the tare function.
Be sure to choose a container that
easily fits in the balance and will
also be within the weight limit for
the balance when you add the reagent.
If you are weighing out a liquid,
it is because the mass of liquid
matters for your experiment.
All liquids are volatile
to some degree, even aqueous solutions,
so it is best to use a
capped container.
Now you can start measuring out
your DI water.
Be sure to double check how much water
you are weighing out before you begin.
Add the water to the weighing vessel by
either pouring it in or
using a transfer pipette.
In this case, a plastic transfer
pipette is being used because this is
compatible with water.
If the chemical you are weighing is not
compatible with plastic, use a glass
Pasteur pipette for the transfer.
When you want to weigh the amount
of liquid transferred so far,
close the door of the balance and
wait until the reading stabilizes.
If you find that you have not added
enough, you can uncap the tube
and add more water.
You can use an estimated difference
from what is being weighed
to determine how much water to add.
Keep in mind that this is only
an estimate because the weight does not
include the cap and the door to
the analytical balance is open.
Be sure to add the additional water
one drop at a time.
When weighing the sample again,
replace the cap and close the door
to the balance.
If you have added too much water
to the tube, remove excess water
from the weighing vessel using
a transfer pipette.
Be sure to dispose of the liquid
you remove into your waste container,
not back into the secondary container.
Again, when checking the new weight,
be sure to replace the cap
and close the door to the balance.
When you have reached the correct
weight, record the exact reading
in your notebook.
Remove the weighing vessel from
the balance, and wipe the balance down
with lint-free lab wipes.
Be careful not to put weight on
the plate when wiping it down.